Adds process for changing the Ion Schema language (#133)
amazon-ion/ion-schema: docs/process-for-changing-ion-schema.md

## Ion Schema Language Evolution Goals

The following are the goals that inform the rest of this document.

* The design work for Ion Schema should be open source.
* The process should be lightweight and should not be an encumbrance to evolving Ion Schema.
* Don’t let perfect be the enemy of good—the most important part of vetting a proposed change is ensuring that it is *not bad*.
* The design of Ion Schema should be *community-driven*. That means that if community members would like to contribute a feature that fits with the stated design guidelines of Ion Schema, the default response should be to accept it unless there is a critical and well documented reason not to.

## Ion Schema Design Guidelines

> Loosely based on the [original ISL 1.0 rational](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-1-0/spec#rationale), they are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loosely based on the [original ISL 1.0 rationale](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-1-0/spec#rationale), they are:
```

* ISL should be safe—it should be safe to use Ion Schema libraries with schemas and/or data from untrusted sources. (One implication, for example, is Ion Schema features should not permit arbitrary code execution or create any unmitigable attack vectors.)

## Roles

The following are key actors in the process for evolving the Ion Schema Language. A person may have more than one role.

* **Contributor:** a person who contributes code, ideas, documentation, or anything else to Ion Schema.
* **Maintainer**: a contributor who is a member of the group that has final decision-making authority for matters of design and implementation of Ion Schema and is responsible for the ongoing development of Ion Schema. For now, this is the Ion Team.
* **Feature Requestor**: a contributor who requests a feature. Usually “the feature requestor” used in reference to a specific feature.

# The Process

## Summary

* A **feature requestor** submits an issue suggesting an idea or describing a problem.

> * Ion Schema **maintainers** informally decide whether it is a good idea (and explains, with adequate justification, why or why not the idea should be included).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ion Schema **maintainers** informally decide whether it is a good idea (and explain, with adequate justification, why or why not the idea should be included).
```

*DO NOT INCLUDE ANY PROPRIETARY INFORMATION IN YOUR REQUEST.*

This GitHub issue will allow the **maintainers** to discuss the proposal and decide whether they would like to see a more detailed RFC. Keep in mind that a feature’s soundness is not the only facet of the proposal that will be weighed. Any new feature could require:

* Adding support for the new feature in multiple [Ion Schema libraries](https://amzn.github.io/ion-schema/libs.html).
* Adding comprehensive example data to the centralized test repository, [`ion-schema-tests`.](https://github.com/amzn/ion-schema-tests)
* Planning an upgrade path for customers’ existing data.

If a change is backwards compatible, it may be included in a new *minor* version of the specification. Any changes that are not backwards compatible must be released in a new *major* version of the specification. To learn more about what kinds of changes can be released in a minor version bump, please review the document [*Ion Schema Language Versioning*](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-versioning).

> Following discussion, the Ion Schema **maintainers** will either close the issue or leave it open and ask the requestor for a full specification.

Reviewer: I can imagine circumstances where someone other than the requestor may be the one to write the full specification. Is there a reason to be so specific here?

Author: > Is there a reason to be so specific here?

Only that "and ask for a full specification" immediately raises the question of _who_ is being asked.

I want to indicate that the issue is being left open for a particular purpose. I agree that it doesn't need to be the requestor who writes it. I think it's fair to ask the requestor if they would be willing to formalize their idea, but I don't think the requestor should be required to do it.

```suggestion
Following discussion, the Ion Schema **maintainers** will either close the issue or leave it open pending a full specification.
The **requestor** and/or the **maintainers** may write the specification for the feature, but neither are required to do so; the specification may be written by any **contributor**.
```

* **Motivation:** Describe the limitations of the incumbent Ion Schema version you hope to modify. Give examples of data and/or use cases that can lead to problems with processor performance, fidelity, or expressiveness.
* **Proposal:** Provide a thorough walk-through of the feature you propose. Using examples, demonstrate the benefits it offers in applicable situations.
* **Alternatives considered:** This section is an opportunity to head off discussions about ideas that you have already considered and dismissed for one reason or another. Questions to consider addressing include:
  * What are some ways to achieve the same thing using features that are already available in the current version of Ion Schema?
  * Could the functionality you need be provided using application-defined open content in Ion Schema? (For example, a ISL based code generator does not need a `javadoc` field added to the spec when an open content field called `_javadoc` would suffice.)
  * Did you tinker with different syntax and semantics for your feature before ultimately going with your current proposal? List them here and explain why they were less optimal.

> For examples, please see the feature RFCs for Ion Schema [*Open Content*](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-schema/blob/208165adb10c889949252e7ccd926862bfe60019/rfcs/ion_schema_2_0/open_content.md)  or Ion 1.1 *[Templates](https://github.com/amzn/ion-docs/blob/bf33a708d806e46bc24e6bad4a95c12fa359bac8/rfcs/ion_1_1/feature-templates.md#rfc-ion-templates)* and *[Inlineable Symbols](https://github.com/amzn/ion-docs/blob/bf33a708d806e46bc24e6bad4a95c12fa359bac8/rfcs/ion_1_1/ion_1_1.md#inline-symbols).*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples, please see the feature RFCs for Ion Schema [*Open Content*](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-schema/blob/208165adb10c889949252e7ccd926862bfe60019/rfcs/ion_schema_2_0/open_content.md) or Ion 1.1 *[Templates](https://github.com/amzn/ion-docs/blob/bf33a708d806e46bc24e6bad4a95c12fa359bac8/rfcs/ion_1_1/feature-templates.md#rfc-ion-templates)* and *[Inlineable Symbols](https://github.com/amzn/ion-docs/blob/bf33a708d806e46bc24e6bad4a95c12fa359bac8/rfcs/ion_1_1/ion_1_1.md#inline-symbols).*
```

Note that in some circumstances, the RFC may need to be modified between the PR being merged and it being added to the spec in a new version. Such changes would typically be needed to address technical conflicts that were not identified during the initial RFC discussion. If necessary, the changes will be done in a later PR that does not follow the complete RFC process. The **maintainers** will attempt to include interested parties from the original RFC in the new PR and aim to minimize the changes being introduced.

## 3. An Ion Schema Version RFC will adopt the feature

*Ion Schema Version RFCs* are meta-RFCs that describe a new version of Ion Schema. They are PRs created by the **maintainers**, not by community members proposing a new feature. Version RFCs include a `.md` file that contains:

* A list of the feature RFCs to be included in the new version, including for each a brief summary and a link to the accepted RFC for that feature. Links to other documentation may also be included.

> * The list of all accepted feature RFCs that are *not* included in the new version, with a reason why it is not included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The list of all accepted feature RFCs that are *not* included in the new version, with reasons why they are not included.
```

If we are interested in an idea but **feature requestor** does not want to create an RFC, we may decide to take it up ourselves, but we are not required to do so.

## Approving an RFC

The Ion Schema **maintainers** are responsible for implementing and maintaining both the spec and most of its implementations, so we are the biggest stakeholder. The RFC cannot move ahead without the **maintainers**’ agreement.
We believe that it should be easy to iterate on Ion Schema, and so the most critical feedback that we can receive is whether something we are introducing is a misfeature or could otherwise cause problems later on. Feedback about the omission of desired features (or part of a feature) will also be considered, but we may decide to defer solving it if there are no backwards compatibility issues that the proposed feature would introduce.

After feedback has been gathered from Ion Schema users and subject-matter experts, the Ion Schema **maintainers** will incorporate the feedback and make the final decision on the RFC.

The outcome of this process will be shared on the `ion-schema` GitHub issue, resulting in the PR being merged or closed as appropriate.

> ## Creating an RFC for a new Ion Schema version

Reviewer 2: This section has a lot of good details on when to create a new schema version. I had a suggestion to add a consideration in this section, feel free to skip it if it doesn't make sense to add here. Should this also add a consideration of when to have major vs minor version based on current requests? For example, if the current feature request includes a breaking change then we might want to wait for a couple of more features to be added for a new major version release.

Author: No, I don't think we should delay a breaking change in order to batch them up (unless there is another breaking change that is _currently_ in flight). We've demonstrated that it is possible to have ISL 1.0 and ISL 2.0 import types from each other and mostly share an internal model in the implementations. The different ISL versions are really just feature gates for different syntax.

When we should create a new version depends on our subjective judgment of whether it is a good time for a new version. However, we should consider:

* Are we still in the midst of implementing the last Ion Schema version?
* How many accepted features are waiting to be released in a new version of the ISL spec?

> * Has anyone specifically asked for a new version to be released?

Reviewer: Maybe there should also be some attempt to quantify the impact of the new change.

Author: While I think impact is a good idea, I think that "bandwidth to work on it" is probably the closest proxy we _should_ use for an open source project. The people/corporations who are funding the project (with their time or money) have different opinions about what is impactful—or more precisely, what is impactful enough to take priority over other projects (internal or external) that also need funding.

I think "bandwidth to work on it" implies "impactful enough that someone is willing to invest time/effort into changing it" and is a reasonable enough proxy for subjective, relative impact. What do you think?

We should be transparent if we do not have the bandwidth to implement a new version, but we should not stand in the way of someone who is willing to invest their own time in improving Ion Schema.

# FAQ

#### **Why is there no private comment period?**

Ion Schema is an open source project, so we are going to try to do our design work out in the open too. We want interested parties to be able to share their thoughts and have a say in the direction of Ion Schema. (See [opensource.guide – Keep Communication Public](https://opensource.guide/best-practices/#keep-communication-public).)

#### What if I have feedback that contains confidential information?

If you are employed by Amazon, refer to internal policies about sharing confidential information.

If you are not employed by Amazon, please do not share any confidential information on GitHub or directly with the **maintainers**. If you need additional time to rework your feedback so that it does not include confidential information, you may ask for the comment period to be extended.

Regardless of the source, the **maintainers** will attempt to publicly summarize all private feedback.

#### Can a feature RFC become “un-accepted”?

> Yes. An RFC can be “un-accepted” by another RFC that explicitly revokes or supersedes a prior RFC. This “un-acceptance” RFC is expected to go through the same process as any other RFC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yes. An RFC can be “un-accepted” by another RFC that explicitly revokes or supersedes a prior RFC. This “un-accepted” RFC is expected to go through the same process as any other RFC.
```

Author: "Unacceptance RFC" is intended to mean "the RFC that proposes revoking a previously accepted RFC", so changing it to "unacctepted RFC" would incorrectly change the meaning here. However, the fact that you thought to suggest this change indicates that my language was not clear enough on this point. I'll try to think of a better way to phrase it, and I'm open to suggestions if you have any.

Reviewer: We can say "reverted" instead of "un-accepted", and we can say "An RFC that reverts or supersedes a previous RFC is expected to go through the same process as any other RFC."

Author: ```suggestion
Yes. An RFC can be reverted by another RFC that explicitly revokes or supersedes a prior RFC. An RFC that reverts or supersedes a previous RFC is expected to go through the same process as any other RFC.
```

Without Ion Schema specification versions, almost any functional change to the Ion Schema specification is a potentially breaking change for Ion Schema users. When new features are added to the Ion Schema specification, prior releases of Ion Schema implementations will not have support for those features, causing a schema document to be interpreted differently depending on what version of an Ion Schema library is being used. To ensure that a schema document has consistent behavior across all releases of all implementations, new features are grouped into new versions of the Ion Schema specification. (For more details about Ion Schema versions, see [ISL Versioning](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-versioning).)

## Ion Schema Language Evolution Goals

The following are the goals that inform the rest of this document.

* The design work for Ion Schema should be open source.
* The process should be lightweight and should not be an encumbrance to evolving Ion Schema.

> * Don’t let perfect be the enemy of good—the most important part of vetting a proposed change is ensuring that it is *not bad*.

Reviewer 3: In the body of the document you explicitly assert that we evaluate whether something is good enough in order to advance through the process. Should we consider reframing those assertions to better align with this goal of the document?

Author: > Should we consider reframing those assertions to better align with this goal of the document?

Can you clarify what you mean by that?

## 4. A new Ion Schema spec version will be released

When developer bandwidth is available, the next Ion Schema version RFC will be merged. At this point, **contributors** (in all likelihood, mostly just the **maintainers**) will write a new version of the Ion Schema specification that incorporates the changes in the Ion Schema Version RFC. Designing the exact format of the new specification document, including how individual features’ supported versions will be communicated, is outside of the scope of this document.

Once the new version of the spec has been merged (via one or more pull requests), Ion Schema libraries can be updated to add support for the features that were included in the new version.

As before, announcements will be added to the Ion home and news pages.

# Internal steps for considering a proposal

*This section is addressed to the Ion Schema ** **maintainers**.* *It is included here in order to be transparent about the approval process.*

> ## Requesting an RFC

Reviewer 3: Should we consider a Service Level Objective (SLO), e.g. The "2 and 5 Promise" for interviewing?

Author: We could, but I don't think that it belongs here. To use a governmental analogy—this document is intended to be a bit of a "constitution" for the Ion Schema specification. Something like a SLO for response time seems more like a "department policy".

> When a community member creates a feature request in `ion-schema`, we (the Ion Schema **maintainers**) will engage with the requester on the GitHub issue. The **maintainers** will come to a consensus on the proposal; if its value proposition is compelling, we will request an RFC to explore the technical details of its implementation in depth. If the perceived value of the proposal is too low compared to the effort/expense required to implement it, we will politely decline. However, this does not preclude the

Reviewer 3: Incomplete Sentence
